feat: render SARIF fixes and formatter diffs as GitHub suggestions (#149)
bugale/bugalint: README.md

  before anything else happens, so the SARIF file, the workflow log, the summary, the comments and the step's success or failure all reflect only the new
  issues. If set to false or omitted, the action considers every issue. An issue spanning several lines is considered new if any one of them was added, since
  fixing such an issue usually requires changing the lines around it as well.

  Note that this also removes the old issues from the SARIF, so uploading it to code scanning resolves their alerts. Leave it unset when the SARIF is uploaded
  and the alerts of the whole repository should be kept.

  This input was named `failOnlyNew` before it applied to anything but the failure. Renaming it is therefore not the whole migration: a workflow that uploaded
  a complete SARIF while narrowing only its exit code starts uploading a filtered one. GitHub does not reject an input an action does not declare, so passing
  the old name fails the step with an error saying so, rather than leaving it to look like it is still in effect.

  Rename the input and update the pinned version in the same commit. Only the old name can be rejected: an older version of the action cannot know about the

>   new one, so a workflow that renames the input without moving the pin has it ignored in silence and fails on every issue instead of the new ones.

Author: Remove this whole section

Author: BEEP BOOP! I am Copilot using Bugale's account: Removed.

  root. This is required only when the linter's output contains paths that are relative but not to the repository's root, for which this action will
  re-relativize them.

> - `message`: The message of the issues found by an input format that does not carry one, currently only `diff`. Defaults to `Not formatted correctly`.

Author: ```suggestion
- `message`: The message of the issues found by an input format that does not carry one (e.g. `diff`). Defaults to `Not formatted correctly`.
```

Author: BEEP BOOP! I am Copilot using Bugale's account: Taken, with the wording from your next comment: it is an additional message appended to every issue now, rather than a replacement for a missing one.

> - `message`: The message of the issues found by an input format that does not carry one, currently only `diff`. Defaults to `Not formatted correctly`.

Author: Actually, instead of saying it replaces the message when there isn't a message, change the semantics of this input to "additional message". If the parser has no message, it's going to be the whole message. But it should be supported for other parsers as well, and just add this message at the end or beginning (you choose)

Author: BEEP BOOP! I am Copilot using Bugale's account: Done. It is appended to the message of every issue for every input format, and is empty by default, so a format that carries no message of its own ends up with this as its whole message and a format that does keeps its own text with this after it.

#### Formatter Diffs

The `diff` input format turns the output of `git diff` into issues, which makes any formatter that can rewrite files in place a linter reporting
[suggested changes](#suggested-changes):

```yaml
- run: clang-format -i $(git ls-files '*.cpp')
- run: git diff > clang-format.diff
- uses: bugale/bugalint@v1
  with:
    inputFile: 'clang-format.diff'
    toolName: 'clang-format'
    inputFormat: 'diff'
    message: 'Not formatted according to .clang-format'
    comment: true
```

Every contiguous run of changed lines becomes one issue, rather than every hunk, so the context lines `git diff` prints around each change do not widen the
reported range. Issues are anchored on the lines of the old side of the diff, which are the lines of the committed file that the pull request shows and that
comments can be attached to, while the new side becomes the fix. A run that only adds lines has no line of its own to anchor to, so it is extended to a
neighbouring line, preferring the preceding one, whose content is repeated in the fix. The marker `git diff` prints for a file that does not end with a newline

> is ignored, so the last line of such a file is reported like any other. A change of that terminator alone leaves the old and the new lines identical, so the

Author: Why?
If a formatter added a newline to the end of a file that didn't have it, I think we should report it.

Author: BEEP BOOP! I am Copilot using Bugale's account: It **is** reported — the issue, the log line, the SARIF result, the summary row and the step failure all happen exactly as for any other change. The only thing dropped is the *suggestion*, and the README sentence is about the fix, not about the report. I'll reword it if it reads as "not reported".

The reason is that such a run has nothing to suggest. Git prints it as:

```diff
-};  //  namespace sent
\ No newline at end of file
+};  //  namespace sent
```

Both sides carry **identical text** — the only difference is the terminator, and the `\ No newline at end of file` marker that carries it is filtered out just above (it arrives as an ordinary change object with a duplicated line number, and left in, its text would land inside the suggestion).

So the fix would replace the line with itself. GitHub renders that suggestion, a reviewer clicks *Commit suggestion*, nothing changes, and the comment returns on the next run with no action that can resolve it.

There is a version of this that would work — appending an empty line and relying on GitHub to terminate the last line of an applied suggestion, which is what reviewdog does — but I could not verify that behaviour: there is no API for applying a suggestion, so it needs a human click to settle. Guessing at it is what produced the blank-vs-deletion bug further up this PR, so I left the line reported and the suggestion off. Say the word and I'll take the reviewdog approach.

Author: Do what reviewdog does

Author: BEEP BOOP! I am Copilot using Bugale's account: Done, in `e8b2ec4`.

I read reviewdog's rule at the source rather than copying the behaviour by description — `reviewdog/reviewdog`, `parser/diff.go`, master:

```go
107  if hunk.EOFNewline == diff.LineAdded {
108      // Adding a blank line here should prompt an EOF newline
109      // to be inserted (rather than a complete blank line).
110      // This is known to work with GitHub review suggestions, at least.
113      state.newLines = append(state.newLines, "")
114      // NOTE: this doesn't handle the case of a deleted eof newline
115      // because it's much rarer in practice.
```

So a trailing empty line in the suggestion body asks GitHub for a newline at the end of the file rather than for a blank line, and a terminator-only change now gets a suggestion whose text repeats the line and adds that empty line, instead of no fix at all. `joinFixLines` terminates every line rather than joining between them, so `['int a = 0;', '']` renders as `int a = 0;\n\n` — the line, then the empty one — which is exactly reviewdog's shape.

Two details worth stating, since I took its scope as well as its trick:

- It appends the empty line **after** the hunk loop, to the run still open at the end of the hunk, so only a run at EOF is affected. Ours is the same: the marker can only occur at EOF, so the run being extended is necessarily the last one.
- Its `NOTE` at 114-115 is deliberate — a *removed* EOF newline is not handled. We match that, because no suggestion can express "drop the final newline"; that case is still reported without a fix.

The marker `git diff` prints inherits the type of the change before it, which gives four shapes, all covered by unit tests:

| markers in the chunk | meaning | fix |
| --- | --- | --- |
| on the `-` side only | the formatter **added** the terminator | text + a trailing empty line |
| on the `+` side only | the terminator was **removed** | none |
| on both sides | neither side ends with a newline, so it is unchanged | text only, marker excluded |
| none | ordinary change | text only |

Two results in `__tests__/diff.output.json` moved: `src/eof.c` gains the empty line in its `insertedContent` (`"  int last = 0;\n"` -> `"  int last = 0;\n\n"`), and `src/term.c` — the terminator-only case that previously had no fix — gains a whole `fixes` block. Result count is unchanged at 10.

64 tests, lint clean, `dist/` rebuilt and byte-reproducible.

        {
          "artifactLocation": { "uri": "test.py" },
          "replacements": [{ "deletedRegion": { "startLine": 3, "endLine": 4 }, "insertedContent": { "text": "def f():\n    return 1" } }]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

GitHub replaces whole lines, so a fix is rendered only when its `deletedRegion` covers exactly the lines of the result's own region, which is what the comment
is anchored to. Following the SARIF specification, in which an absent `endColumn` means the end of the text of `endLine`, both of the usual ways of writing
such a region are accepted:

- `{ "startLine": 3, "endLine": 4 }` covers the text of lines 3 to 4 without the line terminator ending line 4, so `insertedContent.text` is the new text of
  those lines and must not end with a newline.

- `{ "startLine": 3, "startColumn": 1, "endLine": 5, "endColumn": 1 }` covers the same lines including the line terminator ending line 4, so
  `insertedContent.text` must end with a newline. Exactly one is removed when rendering the suggestion.

Any other `deletedRegion`, such as one replacing a part of a line or lines other than the reported ones, cannot be rendered as a suggestion. Such a fix is

> ignored, and the issue is commented on without one.

Author: Why replacing part of a line can't be reported? Can't you take the whole line, replace what's needed, and then report a suggestion with the whole new line suggested?

Author: BEEP BOOP! I am Copilot using Bugale's account: It **is** reported — the issue is commented on, it goes into the SARIF and the summary, and it fails the step. Only the suggestion is omitted.

The reason we cannot build the whole line is that bugalint never reads the source file. Its inputs are the linter's output and, for comments, the pull request diff — neither of which contains the line being replaced. A character-precise fix gives us the fragment and the columns (say columns 5-7 -> `===`) but not the other 60 characters of that line, so there is nothing to splice the fragment into. Emitting a whole-line suggestion anyway would replace the entire line with `===`, which is why it is ignored instead.

It is solvable, just not for free: the action runs in the consumer's checkout, so it could read the file off disk. That adds a dependency this action does not have today — that the working tree matches the revision the linter analysed, which is not true when the linter output is an artifact from an earlier job, or when `analysisPath` points somewhere the checkout does not mirror — and it would need to be wrong loudly rather than silently, so it wants a guard comparing what it read against something the fix already tells us.

Happy to do it in a follow-up if you want part-of-a-line fixes rendered. Left out here because the two producers this PR targets, `diff` and clang-format-style whole-line SARIF, never emit one.
